[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So we're going to talk
about, how could tapping be used
for something as common
as sleeping issues?
We do know that insomnia is
quite prevalent across lots
of different ages.
So it could be around stressful,
transient times in life.
Certainly, I know children
going from primary school
to high school.
And they actually have sort
of sleep disturbed there.
Certainly, new job changes
or changes in life.
And then as we say
hormone changes
that occur for older adults, we
see insomnia as side effects.
Now, all of those reasons don't
mean that we can't use tapping.
And certainly, there have
been a few published research
trials on insomnia and
how it can be used.
So I thought I might share with
you some common reasons that
contribute to primary
insomnia and how
we could actually use that.
Most of the time, you'll
probably do this in bed.
So it is one of the
nice times that you
could do tapping in bed.
If you found that you were
disturbing somebody else,
you may want to get out
of bed and go and sit
in a chair somewhere
in a private room.
Otherwise, it is
something that you
would do if you woke up in
the middle of the night.
So some of the
common contributors
to primary insomnia, where we
are talking, even though it
is a clinical issue,
it doesn't have
any secondary issues
attached to it,
EG, medical conditions
that might be contributing.
So primary insomnia
typically might be
due to things like racing mind.
So people go to bed.
And of course, I
certainly can relate
to this, that you've had a
busy day, lots that's happened,
lots of family, lots of
work, lots to commitments.
And of course, when you get your
downtime and your quiet time
at night, that's when your
brain takes its opportunity
to start to do some processing,
which might not ideally
fit with the sleep that you're
trying to get for the next day
to start again.
So definitely racing
mind, anxious thoughts,
worry thoughts even,
those types of things.
So we can use tapping
for that, which
we'll have a look at today.
It can certainly
be used for things
like getting to sleep, even
if there's no racing mind,
that you just find you
lie there rolling around
and perhaps have
become in a bad habit
of not going to sleep till
midnight, that type of thing.
Or even early morning
wakening, so a lot of people
will fall asleep quite easily.
But then something perhaps wakes
them around 2:00 or 3:00 AM.
It's too early to get up.
Of course, they don't
want to start their day.
And they want to
go back to sleep
to get a full sleep cycle.
Again, tapping
can be used there.
So several different ways.
People that have
chronic pain also
have insomnia many, many
times and will often
use tapping to
actually, if they are
awakened by pain, to
put themselves back
to sleep as well.
So again, it's a
non-medication-based,
but a self-soothing,
technique that
will reduce stress and
just help you relax
to be able to go back to sleep.
So I thought today we might have
a go at just some general ways
that we can use tapping and
some words that we can say.
Of course, remember,
specific words
relevant to your situation
are always the best.
So anything that I'm saying
that doesn't quite hit the mark,
feel free to substitute
that for the word
that best describes you.
Again, if you were
in the moment,
and perhaps you
were there, we'll
talk racing mind to start with.
And you were having worrying
thoughts, or anxious,
or you were just planning
the next day ahead,
you could give that
a rating out of 10.
So you could definitely
say, how much is this
bothering me at the moment?
How much am I bothered that
I'm not going to sleep?
I'm not watching the clock.
And time's ticking on.
Give it a rating out of 10.
And then, of course,
you could start.
So let's do a typical
set-up statement
that might relate to having
worrying, anxious, racing
thoughts.
So something like this as
you're sitting or lying
in bed at night.
So even though I'm trying to
get to sleep, my mind is racing.
I just can't relax.
I accept this is how I feel.
Even though my mind is racing,
I have so much to think about.
And I can't get to sleep.
I accept I feel this way.
Even though my mind is racing
with all of these thoughts,
I accept this is how I feel.
But I'm choosing to
do something about it.
So up to the eyebrow
point and tapping there.
These racing thoughts--
side of the eye--
I can't get to sleep.
Under the eye.
These racing
thoughts in my mind.
Under the nose.
I can't get to sleep.
On the chin point.
My racing, anxious mind.
Collarbone.
I can't get to sleep.
Under the arm.
These racing, anxious thoughts.
Top of the head.
I can't get to sleep.
So take in your deep breath.
And, of course, you
would be there at night
and just checking
in with yourself
to see what's happening.
Is there a particular
thought that's bothering you?
If there is, that's where
you could take your tapping.
If there was a particular
worry that was bothering you,
that's where you
should focus your mind,
rather than, I
can't get to sleep.
If there isn't
anything specifically,
you may just want to continue
your tapping by focusing on,
I can't relax, I
can't get to sleep,
I can't quiet my mind
enough to get to sleep.
So let's do one round of tapping
on that particular topic.
But remember, if there was
something particularly worrying
you, that's where
the words should go.
So back to the eyebrow point.
I can't quiet my mind.
Side of the eye.
My mind is too busy.
Under the eye.
I can't relax to go to sleep.
Under the nose.
My racing mind.
On the chin point.
I can't get to sleep.
Under the collarbone point.
This racing mind of mine.
Under the arm.
I can't relax to go to sleep.
Top of the head.
This racing mind of mine.
Deep breath in.
Of course, you would check
in, see how that feels,
give your relaxation
level a rating out of 10
as you're lying there
at night to see,
how close am I here
to be able to let go
and drift off to sleep?
We'll do one more random
tapping for this particular area
of insomnia.
Because after a
few tapping rounds,
you can start to be suggestive
to your mind of what
you would like it to do.
So if you do find you're
starting to let go
and you're relaxing, you
could introduce some words
to give your mind the idea.
And we would err on
the side of calling
this more positive
tapping, where
you can give your
mind the idea of what
it is that you're after.
So back to the
eyebrow point here.
I'm starting to relax.
Side of the eye.
I could easily drift off.
Under the eye.
I'm starting to relax.
Under the nose.
I could have a restful night.
Chin point.
I'm starting to relax.
Collarbone.
I'm letting go.
Under the arm.
I'm ready for a restful sleep.
Top of the head.
I'm ready to drift off.
Take a deep breath.
If you got that
far, you may have
found that you've fallen
asleep before you get there.
But of course, a
couple of rounds
of being suggestive
to the brain,
too, particularly as
we're drifting off
into some of those nice theta,
delta-theta brainwave states
that are leading us
into that sleep cycle,
you can actually incorporate
into some of those final rounds
of tapping.
So definitely addressing the
sleep issue to begin with.
What's the worry?
What's the stress?
What's the reason that you
actually aren't asleep?
And then, after a couple of
rounds of the body starting
to relax, start to
introduce some ideas there
of what it is that you
would like to achieve.
So, of course, if
you were to wake
in the middle of the night for
a noise or a different reason,
perhaps even to
use the bathroom,
and then you find you can't
get back to sleep, of course,
you can use tapping for
that type of thing, as well.
So many different applications
that we can actually
use tapping for.
And this is such a
common area that even
children could be
taught how to use
tapping to put
themselves back to sleep
in the middle of the night.